---
layout: post
title: On {zmadu}, {jei}, {ni}, and {ka}
---

**Note**: This post is primarily about my bankle, not about
standard Lojban.

Lojban makes it easy to say that both Paris and London are
far away:

> la paris je la londyn cu darno

Now how do we say that Paris is _farther_?

The first word that looks relevant is [{darmau}][0]:

> darmau: _x1_ is farther from _x2_ in property _x3_ by
> amount _x4_.

This is not very useful; in fact, I'm going to immediately
bankle it to be

> darmau: _x1_ is farther than _x2_ from _x3_ in property
> _x4_ by amount _x5_.

This offers a solution to our problem:

> la paris la londyn cu darmau

However, how can we do this without lujvo, just putting
{zmadu} and {darno} together somehow?

## {ni} and {jei}

Literally, we want to say that the distance to Paris is
greater than the distance to London.  The abstractor {ni}
takes a bridi and turns it into a quantification of how true
it is.  So {lo ni la paris cu darno} is "the measure of how
far Paris is".  We can thus say

> lo ni la paris cu darno ku
> lo ni la londyn cu darno ku
> zmadu

That's certainly quite a mouthful!  Before looking at how we
can make it shorter, note that {ni} suggests that we're
interpreting the value in a quantitative manner: the
_distance_ to Paris is greater than the _distance_ to
London, and it makes sense to express distance as a number.
We can also use comparisons in cases when the comparison is
qualitative by using the truth-value abstractor {jei}:

> lo jei ti xunre ku
> lo jei ta xunre ku
> zmadu

Literally, "this is red more than that is red".

The distinction between {ni} and {jei} does not matter much
in the case of {darno}.  However, there are words where {ni}
does not make much sense (e.g. {lo ni mi do prami}) and
there are cases when {ni} can provide extra information ({lo
ni do darno cu zmadu li ky mu} could mean "You are more than
five kilometres away from me").

## Brevity through {ka}

In the above examples, we repeat {darno} and {xunre} twice.
That's not convenient in speech, so we can avoid it by using
the _x3_ place of {zmadu} that lets us specify what we
should compare.

> la paris ku la londyn ku zmadu lo ka [ce'u] darno

In this form, instead of _x1_ and _x2_ being values that can
directly be compared, {zmadu} compares the result of
applying _x3_ to _x1_ and _x2_ respectively, treating the
result as a quantity or a quality based on context.

## A mathematical look at {ka}

Formally speaking, {ka broda} is

> _x1_ is a predicate expressing the relation broda.

So {lo ka ce'u darno} is the predicate that expresses that
_x1_ is far.  Note that the usage of {ka} implies that there
_is_ in fact a {ce'u}: for nullary predicates, {jei} is
clearer.

A possible _x2_ for may be an element of the domain of
definition: that is, {lo seka broda} is something that may
or may not have the property of satisfying {broda}.
However, the usefulness of this is not quite so obvious.

Note that there is some similarity with [fancylojban][1]
here.  However, the notion of a predicate that I use is much
more general, since a predicate may evaluate to a quantity
if this makes sense in context.

[0]: https://la-lojban.github.io/sutysisku/en/#seskari=cnano&sisku=darmau
[1]: https://mw.lojban.org/papri/fancylojban

