---
layout: post
title: "Lojban, the… logical? language"
---

This post would likely not exist if I hadn't watched [Jan
Misali's Lojban episode of the Conlang Critic][0].  That
video made two points that stood out to me:

1. Lojban's grammar is not special.
2. Lojban is mabla.

At first glance, both of these struck me as strange.  Isn't
it obvious that the selbri-sumti distinction is totally
different than the noun-verb-adjective-adverb distinction?
And even if this is unclear, or not true—why the
condescension?  Lojban might have flaws, but where does the
blanket dismissal come from?

It's easy to dismiss this as someone unfamiliar with the
language not having a good point to make, but I think
there's an important truth here.  Let's take the points one
by one, but the key point is: _why is Lojban logical?_

## 1. Lojban's grammar is not special

First things first: Lojban is definitely based on predicate
logic and this is expressed in the grammar.  Root words are
arbitrary predicates, which do not fit neatly into
categories like "verb" and "noun".  When thinking about
Lojban, thinking in terms of predicates and arguments is
more useful than thinking in terms of nouns and verbs.

But is it essential?

Let's take {mlatu} and {citka}.  In English, these would be
a noun and a verb respectively.  In Lojban, there's a
pleasing symmetry of {lo mlatu ku citka} and {lo citka ku
mlatu}—"the cat eats" and "the eater is a cat".

This shows just how little effort is needed to construct
this kind of symmetry: nouns need to be permitted as verbs,
meaning "is an _X_", while verbs after an artile need to be
interpreted as "the _X_-er".

Russian allows for similar constructs, though the
verb-to-noun transition is not as smooth: "кот ест" and
"едящий—кот".  There's not as much symmetry, partly due to
verbs and nouns looking different, partly due to Russian
having considerably much more inflection.  This isn't about
anything being logical versus illogical, just a choice to be
made.

What about the fact that Lojban words can have arbitrary
place structures, with no regard for subjects and objects?
A close examination of this shows that this is, if anything,
a point _against_ Lojban.  gismu still have subjects and
objects and they're (largely) structured consistently,
albeit broken up into types like verb, noun,
adjective—rather contrary to exactly the situation that was
sought to be avoided!  The burden of having to learn the
order of the places is hardly something for the language to
be proud of, and places past the third seem distinctly
unpopular.

All this is not a good thing and not a bad thing.  It's neat
that Lojban does correspond closely to mathematics, and it's
also fine that it isn't actually all that special.  I like
the grammar, I think it's neat and fun to play with.  So,
moving on to our next point…

## 2. Lojban is mabla

We again face the question: why the dislike?

I think the answer to this lies in the question we asked
earlier: why is it logical?

After all, as we've just seen, one can take a neutral
position: there's nice analogies to predicate logic that
help understand the language, but in the end, the language
can be viewed however one likes.  People who like logic can
view it logically, and people who like verbs can look at it
differently.

In my opinion, the desire for the "logical" label is because
it makes it sound like particular choices _have_ to be made
down the line because predicate logic is this way or that.
Implication is a combination of negation and disjunction,
because "that's how it is in logic".  Double negation is
meaningless, because "that's how it is in logic".  If you
say {lo mlatu} then you're insisting a cat exists, because
that's what existentially quantifying over something means.

The word "logical" is the tool—the more accurate description
is "prescriptive".

Given that, I think the reaction "your language is mabla"
is… pretty reasonable, actually.  A language being good
needs stronger arguments than "it follows from the maths".

Is this attitude actually reflected in Lojban communities?
Well, apparently it had been sufficiently at some point that
[a Discord server that specifically banned
prescriptivism][1] ({xekce}) was set up.  The folks there
are great and there's really nobody telling you what's right
and what's wrong—and at the same time, while logic is
clearly an inspiration for some, it's not the dominant
topic.  (.u'usai That is, except when I bring it up, which I
feel I do more often than I maybe should.)

## So… What now?

Personally, for me—not much.  I really like Lojban, I find
it a fun language to play around with and one I'd like to be
better at.  There's still a lot about it that I don't agree
with, and I want to figure out if I can fix any of that—or
if I want to try my hand at making something different that
fits my worldview better.

Either way, I'm glad that I'm
starting to understand the people who really don't like it
better, and I hope that with the roljbogu'e community we can
improve the way people see the language. :)

[0]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=l-unefmAo9k
[1]: https://discord.com/invite/dGP5A6Fpj7
